Sentiment analysis is the interpretation and classification of emotions (positive, negative and neutral) within text data using text analysis techniques. Sentiment analysis allows businesses to identify customer sentiment toward products, brands or services in online conversations and feedback.Sentiment analysis is a text analysis method that detects polarity (e.g. a positive or negative opinion) within text, whether a whole document, paragraph, sentence, or clause.Understanding people’s emotions is essential for businesses since customers are able to express their thoughts and feelings more openly than ever before.By automatically analyzing customer feedback from survey responses to social media conversations, brands are able to listen attentively to their customers, and tailor products and services to meet their needs.
For example, using sentiment analysis to automatically analyze 4,000+ reviews about your product could help you discover if customers are happy about your pricing a plan and customer service

Types of Sentiment Analysis models focus on polarity (positive, negative, neutral) but also on feelings and emotions (angry, happy, sad, etc), and even on intentions (e.g. interested v. not interested).
Here are some of the most popular types of sentiment analysisFine-grained Sentiment Analysis, Emotion detection, Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis, Multilingual sentiment analysis Fine-grained Sentiment AnalysisIf polarity precision is important to your business, you might consider expanding your polarity categories to include:Very positive Positive Neutral Negative Very negative This is usually referred to as fine-grained sentiment analysis, and could be used to interpret 5-star ratings in a review, for example: Very Positive = 5 stars Very Negative = 1 star


Emotion detection This type of sentiment analysis aims at detecting emotions, like happiness, frustration, anger, sadness, and so on. Many emotion detection systems use lexicons (i.e. lists of words and the emotions they convey) or complex machine learning algorithms.
One of the downsides of using lexicons is that people express emotions in different ways. Some words that typically express anger, like bad or kill (e.g. your product is so bad or your customer support is killing me) might also express happiness (e.g. this is bad ass or you are killing it).

Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis Usually, when analyzing sentiments of texts, let’s say product reviews, you’ll want to know which particular aspects or features people are mentioning in a positive, neutral, or negative way. That's where can aspect-based sentiment analysis help, for example in this text:"The battery life of this camera is too short", an aspect-based classifier would be able to determine that the sentence expresses a negative opinion about the feature battery life.

Multilingual sentiment analysis can be difficult. It involves a lot of preprocessing and resources. Most of these resources are available online (e.g. sentiment lexicons), while others need to be created (e.g. translated corpora or noise detection algorithms), but you’ll need to know how to code to use them.Benefits of sentiment analysis include:Sorting Data at Scale,l Real-Time Analysis Sentiment analysis, Consistent criteria Sorting Data at Scale Can you imagine manually sorting through thousands of tweets, customer support conversations, or surveys? There’s just too much data to process manually. Sentiment analysis helps businesses process huge amounts of data in an efficient and cost-effective way.

Real-Time Analysis Sentiment analysis can identify critical issues in real-time, for example is a PR crisis on social media escalating? Is an angry customer about to churn? Sentiment analysis models can help you immediately identify these kinds of situations and gauge brand sentiment, so you can take action right away.Consistent criteria It’s estimated that people only agree around 60-65% of the time when determining the sentiment of a particular text. Tagging text by sentiment is highly subjective, influenced by personal experiences, thoughts, and beliefs. By using a centralized sentiment analysis system, companies can apply the same criteria to all of their data, helping them improve accuracy and gain better insights.The main types of algorithms used include:Rule-based systems that perform sentiment analysis based on a set of manually crafted rules.Automatic systems that rely on machine learning techniques to learn from data.Hybrid systems that combine both rule-based and automatic approaches.

Rule-based Approaches Usually, a rule-based system uses a set of human-crafted rules to help identify subjectivity, polarity, or the subject of an opinion.These rules may include various techniques developed in computational linguistics, such as:Stemming, tokenization, part-of-speech tagging and parsing.Lexicons (i.e. lists of words and expressions).Here’s a basic example of how a rule-based system works:Defines two lists of polarized words (e.g. negative words such as bad, worst, ugly, etc and positive words such as good, best, beautiful, etc).Counts the number of positive and negative words that appear in a given text.If the number of positive word appearances is greater than the number of negative word appearances, the system returns a positive sentiment, and vice versa. If the numbers are even, the system will return a neutral sentiment.Rule-based systems are very naive since they don't take into account how words are combined in a sequence. Of course, more advanced processing techniques can be used, and new rules added to support new expressions and vocabulary. However, adding new rules may affect previous results, and the whole system can get very complex. Since rule-based systems often require fine-tuning and maintenance, they’ll also need regular investments.

Automatic methods, contrary to rule-based systems, don't rely on manually crafted rules, but on machine learning techniques. A sentiment analysis task is usually modeled as a classification problem, whereby a classifier is fed a text and returns a category, e.g. positive, negative, or neutral.
Here’s how a machine learning classifier can be implemented:The Training and Prediction Processes, Feature Extraction from Text, Classification Algorithms, Hybrid Approaches

“What is the The Training and Prediction Processes or The Training and Prediction Processes” The Training and Prediction ProcessesIn the training process (a), our model learns to associate a particular input (i.e. a text) to the corresponding output (tag) based on the test samples used for training. The feature extractor transfers the text input into a feature vector. Pairs of feature vectors and tags (e.g. positive, negative, or neutral) are fed into the machine learning algorithm to generate a model.In the prediction process (b), the feature extractor is used to transform unseen text inputs into feature vectors. These feature vectors are then fed into the model, which generates predicted tags (again, positive, negative, or neutral).
Feature Extraction from TextThe first step in a machine learning text classifier is to transform the text extraction or text vectorization, and the classical approach has been bag-of-words or bag-of-ngrams with their frequency.More recently, new feature extraction techniques have been applied based on word embeddings (also known as word vectors). This kind of representations makes it possible for words with similar meaning to have a similar representation, which can improve the performance of classifiers.

Classification Algorithms The classification step usually involves a statistical model like Naïve Bayes, Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machines, or Neural Networks:Naïve Bayes: a family of probabilistic algorithms that uses Bayes’s Theorem to predict the category of a text.Linear Regression: a very well-known algorithm in statistics used to predict some value (Y) given a set of features (X).Support Vector Machines: a non-probabilistic model which uses a representation of text examples as points in a multidimensional space. Examples of different categories (sentiments) are mapped to distinct regions within that space. Then, new texts are assigned a category based on similarities with existing texts and the regions they’re mapped to.Deep Learning: a diverse set of algorithms that attempt to mimic the human brain, by employing artificial neural networks to process data.

Sentiment Analysis Challenges are Subjectivity and Tone,  Context and Polarity, Irony and Sarcasm, Comparisons, Emojis, Defining Neutral
Subjectivity and ToneThe detection of subjective and objective texts is just as important as analyzing their tone. In fact, so called objective texts do not contain explicit sentiments. Say, for example, you intend to analyze the sentiment of the following two texts:The package is nice.The package is red.Most people would say that sentiment is positive for the first one and neutral for the second one, right? All predicates (adjectives, verbs, and some nouns) should not be treated the same with respect to how they create sentiment. In the examples above, nice is more subjective than red.

Irony and Sarcasm When it comes to irony and sarcasm, people express their negative sentiments using positive words, which can be difficult for machines to detect without having a thorough understanding of the context of the situation in which a feeling was expressed.For example, look at some possible answers to the question, Did you enjoy your shopping experience with us?Yeah, sure. So smooth!Not one, but many!What sentiment would you assign to the responses above? The first response with an exclamation mark could be negative, right? The problem is there is no textual cue that will help a machine learn, or at least question that sentiment since yeah and sure often belong to positive or neutral texts.How about the second response? In this context, sentiment is positive, but we’re sure you can come up with many different contexts in which the same response can express negative sentiment.

ComparisonsHow to treat comparisons in sentiment analysis is another challenge worth tackling. Look at the texts below:This product is second to none.This is better than older tools.This is better than nothing.The first comparison doesn’t need any contextual clues to be classified correctly. It’s clear that it’s positive.The second and third texts are a little more difficult to classify, though. Would you classify them as neutral, positive, or even negative? Once again, context can make a difference. For example, if the ‘older tools’ in the second text were considered useless, then the second text is pretty similar to the third text.

EmojisThere are two types of emojis according to Guibon et al.. Western emojis (e.g. :D) are encoded in only one or two characters, whereas Eastern emojis (e.g. ¯ \ _ (ツ) _ / ¯) are a longer combination of characters of a vertical nature. Emojis play an important role in the sentiment of texts, particularly in tweets.You’ll need to pay special attention to character-level, as well as word-level, when performing sentiment analysis on tweets. A lot of preprocessing might also be needed. For example, you might want to preprocess social media content and transform both Western and Eastern emojis into tokens and whitelist them (i.e. always take them as a feature for classification purposes) in order to help improve sentiment analysis performance.
Defining NeutralDefining what we mean by neutral is another challenge to tackle in order to perform accurate sentiment analysis. As in all classification problems, defining your categories -and, in this case, the neutral tag- is one of the most important parts of the problem. What you mean by neutral, positive, or negative does matter when you train sentiment analysis models. Since tagging data requires that tagging criteria be consistent, a good definition of the problem is a must.Here are some ideas to help you identify and define neutral texts:Objective texts. So called objective texts do not contain explicit sentiments, so you should include those texts into the neutral category.Irrelevant information. If you haven’t preprocessed your data to filter out irrelevant information, you can tag it neutral. However, be careful! Only do this if you know how this could affect overall performance. Sometimes, you will be adding noise to your classifier and performance could get worse.Texts containing wishes. Some wishes like, I wish the product had more integrations are generally neutral. However, those including comparisons like, I wish the product were better are pretty difficult to categorize
How Accurate Is Sentiment Analysis?That said, you might be saying, is it worth the effort? The answer is simple: it sure is worth it! Chances are that sentiment analysis predictions will be wrong from time to time, but by using sentiment analysis you will get the opportunity to get it right about 70-80% of the times you submit your texts for classification.If you or your company have not used sentiment analysis before, then you’ll see some improvement really quickly. For typical use cases, such as ticket routing, brand monitoring, and VoC analysis (see below), this means you will save a lot of time and money -which you are likely to be investing in in-house manual work nowadays,- save your teams some frustration, and increase your (or your company’s) productivity.
Sentiment analysis applications:Social media monitoring, Brand monitoring, Voice of customer (VoC), Customer service, Market research

Social Media Monitoring On the fateful evening of April 9th, 2017, United Airlines forcibly removed a passenger from an overbooked flight. The nightmare-ish incident was filmed by other passengers on their smartphones and posted immediately. One of the videos, posted to Facebook, was shared more than 87,000 times and viewed 6.8 million times by 6pm on Monday, just 24 hours later.The fiasco was magnified horrifically by the company’s dismissive response. On Monday afternoon, United Airlines tweeted a statement from the CEO apologizing for “having to re-accommodate customers”. Cue public outrage – you can imagine the field day on Twitter.This is exactly the kind of PR catastrophe you can avoid with sentiment analysis. It’s also an excellent example of why it’s important to care, not only about if people are talking about your brand, but how they’re talking about it. More mentions don't equal positive mentions.In today’s day and age, brands of all shapes and sizes have meaningful interactions with customers, leads, and even competition on social networks like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Most marketing departments are already tuned into online mentions as far as volume – they measure more chatter as more brand awareness. Nowadays, however, businesses need to look for deeper insights. By using sentiment analysis on social media, we can get incredible insights into the quality of conversation that’s happening around a brand.

In short, sentiment analysis can be used to:Analyze tweets and/or facebook posts over a period of time to detect sentiment of a particular audienceMonitor social media mentions of your brand and automatically categorize by urgencyAutomatically route social media mentions to team members best fit to respond.Automate any or all of these processes.Gain deep insights into what’s happening across your social media channels

Top Benefits for social media monitoring:Sentiment analysis is useful in social media monitoring because it helps you do all of the following:Prioritize action. Which is more urgent: a fuming customer or a “thanks!” shout-out? Obviously the angry customer. Sentiment analysis lets you easily filter unread mentions by positivity and negativity, helping you prioritize issues.Track trends over time.Tune into a specific point in time – i.e. the lead-up to a new product launch or the day a particular piece of bad press dropped.Keep a finger on the competition. Why not monitor your competitors’ social media the same way you monitor your own? If you tune in closely, maybe you notice there’s been a negative response to a particular feature of their new product, and you respond by designing a lead generation campaign targeting exactly that gap. They won’t even know what hit them.Example: Trump vs Clinton, according to TwitterOver the course of a few months during the 2016 US Presidential Elections, we collected and analyzed millions of tweets mentioning Clinton or Trump posted by users from around the world. We classified each of those tweets with a sentiment of either positive, neutral, or negative.For example, here are some tweets we analyzed:Negative: “Racial discord was conceived, nurtured, refined & perpetuated by Americans incl @realDonaldTrump’s father. Get real!”Neutral: “@HillaryClinton will receive the first question at tonight’s presidential debate, according to @CBSNews #ClintonVsTrump”.Positive: “Americans trust @realDonaldTrump to Make our Economy Great Again!”Positive: “@wcve it’s amazing how our city loves him and he really loves our city. @HillaryClinton made a great choice for Vice President. @timkaine”.From this simple, easy analysis, we found interesting insights:More tweets mentioned @realDonaldTrump (~450k/day) than @HillaryClinton (~250k/day). Again, this does not equal positivity, but does imply brand awareness (and in the case of something like elections, awareness is key).For both candidates, there were more negative than positive tweets. Given that it’s Twitter and politics, this was not much of a surprise.Trump had a better positive to negative Tweet ratio than Clinton.To sum up, more people were tweeting about Trump, and a higher percentage of people tweeting about Trump were doing so more positively than those tweeting about Clinton.

Brand Monitoring Not only do brands have a wealth of information available on social media, but also across the internet. Instead of focusing on specific social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter, we can find mentions in places like news, blogs, and forums – again, looking at not just the volume of mentions, but also the quality of those mentions.In our United Airlines example, for instance, the flare-up started on the social media platforms of a few passengers. Within hours, it was picked up by news sites and spread like wildfire across the US. News then spread to China and Vietnam, as the passenger was reported to be an American of Chinese-Vietnamese descent and people accused the perpetrators of racial profiling. In China, the incident became the number one trending topic on Weibo, a microblogging site with almost 500 million users.And again, this is all happening within mere hours and days of when the incident took place.

In short, sentiment analysis can be used to:Analyze news articles, blog posts, forum discussions, and other texts on the internet over a period of time to see sentiment of a particular audienc.Automatically categorize the urgency of all online mentions of your brandAutomatically alert designated team members of online mentions that concern their area of work.Automate any or all of these processes.Better understand a brand online presence by getting all kinds of interesting insights and analytics

Top benefits for brand monitoring:Understand how your brand reputation evolves over timeResearch your competition and understand how their reputation also evolves over time.Identify potential PR crises and know to take immediate action. Again, prioritize what fires need to be put out immediately and what mentions can wait.Tune into a specific point in time. Again, maybe you want to look at just press mentions on the day of your IPO filing, or a new product launch. Sentiment analysis lets you do that.Example: Expedia CanadaAround Christmas time, Expedia Canada ran a classic “escape winter” marketing campaign. All was well, except for the screeching violin they chose as background music. Understandably, people took to social media, blogs, and forums. Expedia noticed right away and removed the ad. Then, they created a series of follow-up spin-off videos: one showed the original actor smashing the violin, and in another one, they invited a real follower who had complained on Twitter to come in and rip the violin out of the actor’s hands. Though their original campaign was a flop, Expedia were able to redeem themselves by listening to their customers and responding.Using sentiment analysis (and machine learning), you can automatically monitor all chatter around your brand and detect this type of potentially-explosive scenario while you still have time to defuse it.
Customer FeedbackSocial media and brand monitoring offer us immediate, unfiltered, invaluable information on customer sentiment. However, there are two other troves of insight – surveys and customer support interactions.Net Promoter Score (NPS) surveys are one of the most popular ways for businesses to gain feedback, and start by asking a simple question – Would you recommend this company, product, and/or service to a friend or family member? – that results in a simple number or score. Businesses use these scores to identify customers as promoters, passives, or detractors. The goal is to identify overall customer experience, and find ways to elevate all customers to “promoter” level, where they theoretically will buy more, stay longer, and refer other customers.Numerical survey data is easily aggregated and assessed, but the next question in NPS surveys asks customers why they left the score they did. This triggers a series of open-ended responses that are a lot harder to analyze. However, with sentiment analysis these texts can be classified into positive and negative giving you further insights into why customers left the scores they did.

In short, sentiment analysis can be used to:Analyze aggregated NPS or other survey responsesAnalyze aggregated customer support interactionsTrack customer sentiment about specific aspects of the business over time. This adds depth to explain why the overall NPS score might have changed, or if specific aspects have shifted independently.Target individuals to improve their service. By automatically running sentiment analysis on incoming surveys, you can detect customers who are ‘strongly negatively’ towards your product or service, so you can respond to them right awayDetermine if particular customer segments feel more strongly about your company. You can zero in on sentiment by certain demographics, interests, personas, etc

Top benefits for understanding Voice of Customer (VoC):Use results of sentiment analysis to design better informed questions to ask on future surveysUnderstand the nuances of customer experience over time, along with why and how shifts are happeningEmpower your internal teams by giving them a deeper view of the customer experience, by segment and by specific aspects of the businessRespond more quickly to signals and shifts from customersExample: McKinsey City Voices projectIn Brazil, federal public spending rose by 156% from 2007 to 2015 while people’s satisfaction with public services steadily decreased. Unhappy with this counterproductive progress, the Urban-planning Department recruited McKinsey to help them work on a series of new projects that would focus first on user experience, or citizen journeys, when delivering services. This citizen-centric style of governance has led to the rise of what we call Smart Cities.McKinsey developed a tool called City Voices, which conducts citizen (customer) surveys across more than 150 different metrics, and then runs sentiment analysis to help leaders understand how constituents live and what they need, in order to better inform public policy. By using this tool, the Brazilian government was able to surface urgent needs – a safer bus system, for instance – and improve them first.If even whole cities and countries, famous for their red tape and slow pace, are incorporating customer journeys and sentiment analysis into their decision making processes, then innovative companies better be far ahead.
Customer ServiceWe all know the drill: stellar customer experiences means a higher rate of returning customers. Leading companies know that how they deliver is just as, if not more, important as what they deliver. Customers expect their experience with companies to be immediate, intuitive, personal, and hassle-free. In fact, research shows that 25% of customers will switch to a competitor after just one negative interaction.We already looked at how we can use sentiment analysis in terms of the broader VoC, so now we’ll dial in on customer service teams.

Sentiment analysis can be used to:Automate text classification all incoming customer support queriesRapidly detect disgruntled customers and surface those tickets to the topRoute queries to specific team members best suited to respondGain deep insights into what’s happening across your customer support
Top benefits for customer service:Prioritize order for responding to tickets, being sure to address the most urgent needs first.Increase efficiency by automatically assigning tickets to a particular category or team member.Example: Analyzing customer support interactions on TwitterJust for kicks, we decided to analyze how the four biggest US phone carriers (AT&T, Verizon, Sprint, and T-Mobile) handle customer support interactions on Twitter. We downloaded tens of thousands of tweets mentioning the companies (by name or by handle), and ran them through a MonkeyLearn sentiment model to categorize each tweet as positive, neutral, or negative. We then used our new Insight Extractor, which reads all text as one unit, extracts the most relevant keywords, and returns the most relevant sentences including each keyword.Here’s some insights:T-Mobile had by far the highest percentage of positive tweetsVerizon was the only company with more negative tweets than positive onesTop keywords for positive tweets at Verizon included typical terms such as “new phone,” “thanks,” and “quality customer service”. Key interactions between customers and agents were formal and somewhat dryTop keywords for positive tweets at T-Mobile included names of customer support agents, since their team has higher engagement, as well as back-and-forth type conversations with their followers


Market ResearchAnd as a final use case, sentiment analysis empowers all kinds of market research and competitive analysis. Whether you’re exploring a new market, anticipating future trends, or having an edge over the competition, sentiment analysis can make all the difference.
Sentiment analysis can be used to:Analyze product reviews of your brand and compare those with the competitionGenerate weekly, monthly, or daily reports – a sort of early-warning systemCompare sentiment across international marketsAnalyze formal market reports or business journals for long-term, broader trendsAnalyze tweets and social media posts for real-time happeningAnalyze reviews for unfiltered customer feedbackUse aspect-based sentiment analysis to gain rich insight into the details and the reason for otherwise opaque market trends

Top benefits for market researchTap into new sources of informationQuantify otherwise qualitative informationAdd that qualitative dimension to already-gathered quantitative insightsProvide information in real-time rather than in retrospectAutomated for regular (perhaps weekly) reportsFill in gaps where public data is scarce – in emerging markets, for instance.Examples: Hotel reviews on TripAdvisorOur team was curious about how people feel about hotels in several major cities around the world, so we scraped and analyzed more than one million reviews from TripAdvisor. We looked at hotels in London, Paris, New York, Bangkok, Madrid, Beijing, and Rio de Janeiro.Here are some insights:Reviews were mostly positive – on average, 82% of comments were tagged with a positive sentimentLondon hotels received the worst reviewsLondon hotels were viewed as dirtier than New York hotels, and as having the worst food overall.We used the keyword extraction module to analyze the actual content of the positive/negative reviews, and found a few more interesting insights:“Cockroaches” appears only in Bangkok –watch out!“Croissants” appears only in Paris (as we might expect). Shockingly, though, they appear to be a letdown. Taking a closer look, we were able to conclude this was more a reflection on the subpar hotel breakfast food than on the city itself (phew!).





